Add `Changes to osu!taiko star rating and performance points` news post (#7915)
ppy/osu-wiki: news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-sr-and-pp.md

These changes aim to adjust Star Rating and Performance Points in a way that more accurately reflects the true difficulty of a map, no matter the skillset or playstyle, in contrast to previously where Star Rating's intention was to reflect true difficulty for very specific maps and to target and nerf other specific types of maps, mainly maps with cheesable patterns.

# Introduction

Before we proceed, there are a few key terms and ideas you'll need to understand.

> Star Rating is designed to be a measure of how hard (or not) a given beatmap is. It does this through mathematically charting various values in a map's construction, such as how densely packed a given portion of the map is with hitobjects, and so forth. These are described as *skills* as a general term. For the purposes of the star ratings described here, [morth1](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7246874) selected three skills: *stamina*, *rhythm* and *colour*.

Reviewer: Removed in cdede1d465f2efaa51b73a09709b30534fe2d6a6

In the Star Rating part of the rework, we have re-evaluated and essentially rewritten the stamina and colour skills, introducing new concepts and supporting infrastructure to the complex calculations that you see as Star Rating.

As for the Performance Points part, not only have mod multipliers been reconsidered, but you will also see a new way in which accuracy will affect your performance points. However, it is important to note that these changes are very experimental, as performance was not the priority of this rework.

Without further ado, lets get into the nitty-gritty of these changes.

## Star Rating Changes

### Readdressing Stamina

#### Issues within the old system

> The existing system, created by morth1, implicitly assumed a 2 finger kddk full alternating playstyle (i.e. one in which each subsequent hit is always hit by the other hand regardless of colour). This was implemented as two skills — one for the left hand, and one for the right hand. Instead of using note duration for the split skills, it uses note-pair duration, which is defined as the duration between two notes that were pressed with the same hand.

Reviewer: Removed in cdede1d465f2efaa51b73a09709b30534fe2d6a6

  
### Changes to Accuracy Performance Points Values
  
While Difficulty PP is straightforward, Accuracy performance contained a plethora of issues, both to do with reading-based mods (HD, FL) and mods that affect the Great Hit Window (EZ, DT, HR)

- The impact of the size of the Great (300) hit window on accuracy pp has been reduced significantly. This makes PP less dependent on the OD value of a map, which greatly reduces the issues of low SR maps, with a tight hit window.
- Star rating now affects accuracy pp, which replaces most of the scaling from the previous impact of the great hit window. This further supplements the nerfs the accuracy weighting on low-SR scores and buffs high-SR scores and thus significantly limits abuse of low-SR 3-mod/4-mod scores.
- An additional HDFL bonus has been added to accuracy PP. As this mod combination requires total memorisation of maps, the bonus scales with map length, rewarding longer maps more.

The new hidden-flashlight bonus is graphed here.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/accuracy-mod-bonus.jpg)
  
## Next steps
  

> Future changes will involve rhythm, which hasn't been touched, and reading, an entirely new concept to osu!taiko, as well as many other large and small-scale changes. For people eager to dive into the technicalities, WIP details are available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit). If you would like to give feedback or help contribute, please join the [osu!dev Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) and direct your comments towards the `#difficulty-taiko` channel.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be a good idea to link pp dev server here as well, or is it not something that should be in the newspost?

In the star rating part of this rework, we have re-evaluated and essentially rewritten the stamina and colour skills, introducing new concepts and supporting infrastructure to the complex calculations that you see as star rating.

As for the performance points part, not only have mod multipliers been reconsidered, but you will also see a new way in which accuracy will affect your performance points. However, it is important to note that these changes are very experimental, as performance was not the priority of this rework.

Without further ado, let's get into the nitty-gritty of these changes.

## Star rating changes

### Readdressing stamina

#### Issues within the old system

The old system assumed a 2-finger kddk full alternating playstyle (i.e. one in which each subsequent hit is always hit by the other hand regardless of colour). This was implemented as two skills — one for the left hand, and one for the right hand. Instead of using note duration for the split skills, it uses note-pair duration, which is defined as the duration between two notes that were pressed with the same hand.

> **Never assume a specific playstyle or arbritrarily nerf patterns without a strong justification.**

Reviewer 3: this paragraph comes way too much out of the blue with nothing connecting it to the previous paragraph

Reviewer: Yeah don't really think we wanted to delete this during discussion, restored in 63880bfb15b1255ccc875c55f7bfeb794d590e70

Might wanna take a look at wordings etc though, as it might be removed temporarily for changes back then

These changes aim to change Star Rating and Performance Points in a way that more accurately reflects the true difficulty of a map, no matter the skillset or playstyle, in contrast to previously where Star Rating's intention was to reflect true difficulty for very specific maps and to target and nerf other specific types of maps, mainly maps with cheesable patterns.

# Introduction

As done in the past, there's a few main and new terms/ideas you'll need to understand.

Star Rating is designed to be a measure to reflect how hard (or not) a given beatmap is. It does this through mathematically charting various values in a map's construction, such as how densely packed a given portion of the map is with hitobjects, and so forth. These are described as *skills* as a general term. For the purposes of the star ratings described here, [morth1](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/7246874) selected three skills: *stamina*, *rhythm* and *colour*.

> For the new terminology within difficulty calculation, we refer to *peaks* as a new skill utilised, based on the old component of strain. 

Author: removed in 927d58d

> For the purposes of Star Rating calculation, *strain* within the *peaks* skill has become the number that approximates it. Switching from the previous system, where strain and individual skill values formed Star Rating, strain is now the only summative factor in this calculation. In this case, there are two relevant subtypes of strain; while normal strain decays over time, *note-based strain* decays with every note hit, which is a subtle, yet important distinction only used within the old rhythm system, which has not yet been reworked. In both cases strain is increased by each individual hitobject in the map; we'll refer to that increase as *object strain*.

Author: added a writeup of strain, and removed peaks in 927d58d

- The combined of these changes also helps with the cases where specific playstyles or patterns were nerfed in the previous rework, as we don't detect any patterns, just the pure stamina requirement for each map.

### Readdressing Colour

The old colour system detected the frequency of colour changes and had penalties for specific repeated patterns, this meant that only notes with a different colour from the previous could get more than a non-zero strain, which contributed to issues of complex patterns containing large groups of single coloured notes not being considered properly in the strain system.

Similar to stamina, a repetition penalty was applied on durations of single-coloured patterns. While only the 5 most recent durations were considered in this penalty, if any two or more of those patterns were repeated, a harsh penalty was applied.

> Once again, going against the new policies of this rework, changes were made.

Author: removed in 927d58d

#### The new Colour system

For the new system we define colour difficulty as the amount of information contained within a given pattern (or sequence if you will). For example, we can take a look with the following colour patterns and the very rough amount of information required to describe them:

> ![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/colour-patterns.jpg)

Reviewer 4: Caption of figure should read _Superscript numbers represent the **number** of **notes**, and C represents a colour change._

Reviewer: Applied in c03fa161c742a7a9051f00c3821e74cbb8cfdba5

As we can see, a more complex pattern (by definition) requires more information to describe. To compute this, we run a compression algorithm to try to encode a given colour sequence with the minimum amount of information required. One thing to note is traditional compression algorithms typically build a dictionary from repetitive patterns, the new algorithm however, has to take where the repetitions take place into account, as repetitions that occur far from each other are typically harder to play than repetitions that's close to each other.

> The difficulty value of colour can now be calculated using this new encoding information. **This means that the colour difficulty of each note can be defined as the amount of information it contributes to the sequence so far**. Generally, the more information-dense a given colour sequence is, the harder it is to decode and play. We can estimate the information density of a given density by the amount of encoding chunks required to describe the pattern. Finally, we try to restrict colour difficulty to consider past notes only. Hence, sequences that are exactly the same except for future notes should have identical difficulty values, up until where they differ.

Reviewer 4: *information density of a given density* seems wrong

```suggestion
The difficulty value of colour can now be calculated using this new encoding information. **This means that the colour difficulty of each note can be defined as the amount of information it contributes to the sequence so far**. Generally, the more information-dense a given colour sequence is, the harder it is to decode and play. We can estimate the information density of a given pattern by the amount of encoding chunks required to describe the pattern. Finally, we try to restrict colour difficulty to consider past notes only. Hence, sequences that are share the same beginning should have identical difficulty values, up until the point where they differ.
```

### Calculating the final result

> Given the four skills briefly described above (stamina, rhythm and colour), their strain values are combined into one final Star Rating value. Previously done in two ways, this is now done in one ways - via the new *peaks* skill. *Peak* difficulty splits the map into sections and combines peaks of each skill in each section, aiming to catch out particularly demanding moments. The final Star Rating is the outputted result, slightly multiplied to scale better.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given the four skills briefly described above (stamina, rhythm and colour), their strain values are combined into one final Star Rating value. Previously done in two ways, this is now done in a single way - via the new *peaks* skill. *Peak* difficulty splits the map into sections and combines peaks of each skill in each section, aiming to catch out particularly demanding moments. The final Star Rating is the outputted result of the peaks skill, slightly multiplied to scale better.
```

> While this is much more mathematically complex than mentioned, you can consult the osu!taiko general rework document listed in the above sections, or dive into the code over in the osu!lazer repositor for the full details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While this is much more mathematically complex than mentioned, you can consult the osu!taiko general rework document listed in the above sections, or dive into the code over in the osu!lazer repository for the full details.
```

> While previous sentiments aimed to scale maps in regards to the [difficulty naming hierarchy](/wiki/en/Ranking_Criteria/Difficulty_naming#osu!taiko), this rework has deviated away from the purpose of this, aiming to reflect true difficulty, regardless of naming. This also means that high SR values with near-fc's are no longer near 9.5*, rather can expand well into the 10* range (medal hunters rejoice!)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While previous sentiments aimed to scale maps in regards to the [difficulty naming hierarchy](/wiki/en/Ranking_Criteria/Difficulty_naming#osu!taiko), this rework has deviated away from that goal, aiming to reflect true difficulty, regardless of naming. This also means that Star Rating values for maps with near-FCs are no longer near 9.5*, but rather can expand well into the 10* range (medal hunters rejoice!)
```

Performance points in osu!taiko are currently calculated by summing the "accuracy pp" and "difficulty pp" components of a score — the following changes should serve to increase their values and improve balance not only between difficulty increasing mods, but their reductive counterparts.

Served alongside the SR rework, these changes aim to accurately reflect the new sentiments of the SR system.

### Globally-applied changes

The final step of performance points calculation involves applying a simple multiplier to the calculated value, which consists of both difficulty and accuracy performance points. This allows for simplicity of balancing changes, and works alongside specific multipliers found within their respective separate difficulty values.

- The HD multiplier has been decreased from **1.10x** to **1.075x**, as a further bonus was placed in difficulty PP, rather than globally.
- An EZ multiplier of **0.975x** has been added, to further nerf a problematic mod, especially when paired with double-time.

> - The NF multiplier has been removed, as osu!taiko's HP system is different, it is not required nor needed, which also helps prevent sandbaggers in lower ranks.

Reviewer 4: dash works better here I think

```suggestion
- The NF multiplier has been removed — as osu!taiko's HP system is different, it is not required nor needed, which also helps prevent sandbaggers in lower ranks.
```

> As well as mod multipliers being nerfed, there community survey highlighted the issues with short maps being either underweighted at a full combo, or overweighted at a misscount.

Reviewer 4: *at a misscount* is a weird phrase - is this what was meant?

```suggestion
As well as mod multipliers being nerfed, there community survey highlighted the issues with short maps being either underweighted at a full combo, or overweighted on plays with several misses.
```

Author: meant for higher misscounts, but several works here just fine.

> To combat this, misses will now significantly affect difficulty PP on maps with a max combo below 1000, scaling the miss count with by a multiplier of `1000 / total successful hits`, and can significantly impact short-maps with a higher misscount.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To combat this, misses will now significantly affect difficulty PP on maps with a max combo below 1000, scaling the miss count by a multiplier of `1000 / total successful hits`, and as such can significantly impact short maps with a higher miss count.
```

![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/effective-miss-count.jpg)

### Changes to Difficulty Performance Points Values

The following changes should result in impressive scores on harder beatmaps rewarding a significant increase of performance point values, with top player [syaron105](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/8741695) gaining over 6400 total PP!

Please note that these changes only affect the difficulty part of performance, which refers to the Star Rating value under a mathematically scaled formula.

> - A further EZ multiplier of **0.985x** has been added, further supplementing its nerf.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A further EZ multiplier of **0.985x** has been added, further supplementing its nerf mentioned above.
```

> - A HR multiplier of **1.05x** has been added, this was added as a way to rebalance the changes found within accuracy PP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A HR multiplier of **1.05x** has been added, which was added as a way to rebalance the changes found within accuracy PP.
```

> - Difficulty pp now decreases by the square of decreasing accuracy instead of linearly, which applies a huge nerf unforeseen within previous low-accuracy scores.

Reviewer 4: bit of a strange turn of phrase

```suggestion
- Difficulty pp now decreases by the square of decreasing accuracy instead of linearly, which applies a huge nerf to previously overweighted low-accuracy scores.
```

The new accuracy-scaling formula is mapped here.
  

> ![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/difficulty-accuracy-scaling.jpg)

Reviewer 4: Is there any way to compare with the old numbers in any way, to show the linear v squared difference? As far as I can tell this graph only shows the new values. It's a bit hard to tell what the difference is; doesn't help that the Y axis is largely-unspecified "scaled difficulty".

Author: cc @vunyunt

Reviewer: From what I understand, this change effectively adds an accuracy-based multiplier to the difficulty value. This multiplier were not present previously, and the previous value would just appear as a flat line on this graph. For example, an SR 5 difficulty value would just be plotted as a flat line with Y=5.

I have updated the graph to a accuracy-multiplier graph in c03fa161c742a7a9051f00c3821e74cbb8cfdba5 to perhaps better reflect the nature of this change.

Reviewer 4: New graph seemed maybe a bit barren at first but I think I get the point.

Author: maybe we could get a comparison with the old multiplier? even if its just a power

  
### Changes to Accuracy Performance Points Values
  
While Difficulty PP is straightforward, Accuracy performance contained a plethora of issues, both to do with reading-based mods (HD, FL) and mods that affect the Great Hit Window (EZ, DT, HR)

- The impact of the size of the Great (300) hit window on accuracy pp has been reduced significantly. This makes PP less dependent on the OD value of a map, which greatly reduces the issues of low SR maps, with a tight hit window.
- Star rating now affects accuracy pp, which replaces most of the scaling from the previous impact of the great hit window. This further supplements the nerfs the accuracy weighting on low-SR scores and buffs high-SR scores and thus significantly limits abuse of low-SR 3-mod/4-mod scores.

> - An Additional HDFL Bonus has been added to accuracy PP, as this requires total memorisation of maps, this is multiplied by a length bonus, rewarding more, the longer the map.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- An additional HDFL bonus has been added to accuracy PP. As this mod combination requires total memorisation of maps, the bonus scales with map length, rewarding longer maps more.
```

The new hidden-flashlight bonus is graphed here.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/accuracy-mod-bonus.jpg)
  
## Next steps
  

> Future changes will involve rhythm, which hasn't been touched and reading, an entirely new concept to osu!taiko, as well as many other large and small-scale changes. For people eager to dive into the technicalities, WIP details are available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit). If you would like to give feedback or help contribute, please join the [osu!dev Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) and direct your comments towards the `#difficulty-taiko` channel.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Future changes will involve rhythm, which hasn't been touched, and reading, an entirely new concept to osu!taiko, as well as many other large and small-scale changes. For people eager to dive into the technicalities, WIP details are available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit). If you would like to give feedback or help contribute, please join the [osu!dev Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) and direct your comments towards the `#difficulty-taiko` channel.
```

---
layout: post
title: "Changes to osu!taiko Star Rating & Performance Points"
date: 2022-08-25 12:00:00 +0000
---

It's no secret that osu!taiko star rating is overdue for a rework. Thanks to your responses in the community survey, we are now ready to unveil a series of planned updates and improvements to how difficulty is evaluated in the osu!taiko game mode!

> ![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-part-1/star-rating.jpg)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-part-1/star-rating.jpg)

```

We will also be using terminology coined by the osu!taiko community to refer to how patterns are placed. **k** refers to kat (blue), **d** refers to don (red), coined as different 'colours'. Long streams that are of one colour are referred to as *monos*, while notes that are surrounded by brackets () refer to **1/6** spacing, and notes inside square brackets [] refer to **1/8** spacing. 

If you would like to know more about the changes posted, or for more concise information on the some of the in development changes, head on over [the global osu!taiko rework document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit#). This is a working document, and will periodically be updated with the latest, (and greatest) developments.

## An insight into the base of the new rework

> The previous rework effort aimed to the tackle all three skills at once. This not only made it difficulty to collect meaningful and targetted feedback, but halted continuous development efforts. To combat this, the osu!taiko pp committee developers ([vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) and [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208)) opted for a more modular approach, tackling the new changes one stage at a time, in hopes for being able to fix reported issues one stage at a time. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The previous rework effort aimed to the tackle all three skills at once. This not only made it difficulty to collect meaningful and targetted feedback, but halted continuous development efforts. To combat this, the osu!taiko pp committee developers ([vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) and [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208)) opted for a more modular approach, tackling the new changes one stage at a time, in hopes for being able to fix reported issues one stage at a time.
```

> Moving forward, osu!taiko star rating will be receiving numerous amounts of changes, potentially placing star rating and performance points in a state of flux, particularly over the coming months. During this time, we have been and will continue to work on other difficulty components (both small and large-scale) in preparation for future releases. This is generally desirable as we would want difficulty to accurately reflect the latest trends, but we understand and apologise if this may bring some unintended complications or frustrations, especially in the short term. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Moving forward, osu!taiko star rating will be receiving numerous amounts of changes, potentially placing star rating and performance points in a state of flux, particularly over the coming months. During this time, we have been and will continue to work on other difficulty components (both small and large-scale) in preparation for future releases. This is generally desirable as we would want difficulty to accurately reflect the latest trends, but we understand and apologise if this may bring some unintended complications or frustrations, especially in the short term.
```

Moving forward, osu!taiko star rating will be receiving numerous amounts of changes, potentially placing star rating and performance points in a state of flux, particularly over the coming months. During this time, we have been and will continue to work on other difficulty components (both small and large-scale) in preparation for future releases. This is generally desirable as we would want difficulty to accurately reflect the latest trends, but we understand and apologise if this may bring some unintended complications or frustrations, especially in the short term.

In the star rating part of the rework, we have re-evaluated and essentially rewritten the stamina and colour skills, introducing new concepts and supporting infrastructure to the complex calculations that you see as star rating.

As for the performance points part, not only have mod multipliers been reconsidered, but you will also see a new way in which accuracy will affect your performance points. However, it is important to note that these changes are very experimental, as performance was not the priority of this rework.

Without further ado, lets get into the nitty-gritty of these changes.

## Star rating changes

> ### Readdressinc stamina

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Readdressing stamina
```

This system created by morth1, consisted of assuming a 2 finger kddk full alternating playstyle. (i.e. each subsequent hit is always hit by the other hand regardless of colour). This was implemented as two skills. One for the left hand, and one for the right hand. Instead of using note duration for the split skills, it uses note-pair duration. Which defines the duration between two notes that were pressed with the same hand.

As well as this, specific nerfs for specfic patterns were implemented within a 'cheese detector', which was something that the osu!taiko pp committee wanted to stay away from. As such, a policy for the all the new reworks under our wing was formed.

**Never nerf a specific playstyle or pattern solely for a lack of particular reason.**

#### The new system of Stamina

> In this section, the keybinds relating to the two colours found within osu!taiko are named k<sup>1</sup>, k<sup>2</sup> and d<sup>1</sup>, d<sup>2</sup>. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In this section, the keybinds relating to the two colours found within osu!taiko are named k<sup>1</sup>, k<sup>2</sup> and d<sup>1</sup>, d<sup>2</sup>.
```

- Instead of assuming a full-alternate play style, we assume that **each note of the same colour is always alternated.** For example, for the pattern kdkdkd, we assume the kat's will be hit by **k<sup>1</sup>** d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup> **k<sup>2</sup>** d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup> **k<sup>1</sup>**, and the don's will be hit by k<sup>1</sup> **d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup>** k<sup>2</sup> **d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup>** k<sup>2</sup>.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> - The reason for this is to assume the best case scenario for repeated keystrokes regardless of play style. In other words, it aims to approximate the theoretical minimum stamina required to play a given pattern with any playstyle, with any theoretically rollable pattern being rolled. We can’t (feasibly), nor is it desired to, detect playstyles, so we assume the case that requires the least physical repetition, which is to switch keys each time a colour is to be hit, and each play style will have their respective weaknesses. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The reason for this is to assume the best case scenario for repeated keystrokes regardless of play style. In other words, it aims to approximate the theoretical minimum stamina required to play a given pattern with any playstyle, with any theoretically rollable pattern being rolled. We can’t (feasibly), nor is it desired to, detect playstyles, so we assume the case that requires the least physical repetition, which is to switch keys each time a colour is to be hit, and each play style will have their respective weaknesses.
```

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

These changes also help with cases where specific playstyles or patterns were nerfed in the previous rework, as we no longer detect any patterns, stopping at calculating the pure stamina requirement for each map.

### Readdressing colour

The old colour system detected the frequency of colour changes and had penalties for specific repeated patterns. This meant that only notes of a different colour than the previous one would receive a non-zero strain, which contributed to issues of complex patterns containing large groups of single-coloured notes not being considered properly in the strain system. Similar to stamina, a penalty was applied to repeated occurrences of single-coloured patterns. While only the 5 most recent occurrences were considered in this penalty, if any two or more of those patterns were repeated, a harsh penalty was applied.

#### The new colour system

In the new system, we define colour difficulty as the amount of information contained within a given pattern (which can be thought as of a sequence of notes). For example, we can take a look at the following colour patterns and roughly estimate the amount of information required to describe them:

> ![Colour pattern table showcasing colour sequence compression](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/colour-patterns.jpg)

Reviewer 3: i'm not sure why repetitions are represented as superscripts, why not multiplication sign and number?

Reviewer: That was done mainly for the looks, as the table in the doc looked a bit messy. It also somewhat better portray the "amount of information" bit, as multiplication sign + number makes repetition number looks a little long (i.e. `DDD` looks simpler than `D * 3` or `D x 3`).

As a side note we also considered just number followed by the note (i.e. `5D` etc.), but that was not done due to this font having the large dot symbol not aligned with the number.

I'll pass this to the committee, if it's agreed that multiplication sign + number is more straightforward I'll commit the changes

Reviewer 3: > i.e. DDD looks simpler than D * 3 or D x 3

i'd like to disagree since the left column of the table is supposed to show the "uncompressed" version, i.e. DDD, while Dx3 would be "compressed"

Reviewer: The idea is to make the "compressed" version be as short as possible. That said I can see how a more straightforward notation without the need a legend for description could be a better approach, as the purpose of the table is to give a rough "amount of information" view on the sequences, instead of actually trying to compress the sequences to a minimal amount of characters.

LTCA seems to prefer the shorter version with legend, though that is expected as he was involved in the creation. I'll ask around a bit more and see which one people prefers

Reviewer: It seems like the shorter notation is preferred generally. Mangomizer suggested using notation like 4D, 4K, which makes algebraic sense, and might remove the need for the legend. What do you think about the looks of the attached table?
![colour-table](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5846322/190328903-adf3b418-6936-42ad-88f0-a30240b3b4b7.png)

Reviewer 3: looks ok but please do include legend for D and K if you're also doing C, to make things more obvious for people skimming the article

Reviewer 3: also would be better to clarify that you're *flipping* the colours, that a C represents a flipped copy of the previous pattern

Reviewer: Sounds good, attached again for a final confirmation before commit:
![colour-table](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5846322/190366152-74c8346a-0502-4760-84da-2f3f8ad27b27.png)

Reviewer 3: looks good but just "don (red) note" is fine

Reviewer: Applied in adcb1fcdb1636954e34d876f03609fc83a098f66

The difficulty value of colour can now be calculated using this new encoding information. **This means that the colour difficulty of each note can be defined as the amount of information it contributes to the sequence so far**. Generally, the more information-dense a given colour sequence is, the harder it is to decode and play. We can estimate the information density of a given density by the amount of encoding chunks required to describe the pattern. Finally, we try to restrict colour difficulty to consider past notes only. Hence, sequences that are exactly the same except for future notes should have identical difficulty values, up until where they differ.

### Calculating the final result

> Given the four skills briefly described above (stamina, rhythm and colour), their strain values are combined into one final Star Rating value. Previously done in two ways, this is now done in one ways - via the new *peaks* skill. *Peak* difficulty splits the map into sections and combines peaks of each skill in each section, aiming to catch out particularly demanding moments. The final Star Rating is the outputted result, slightly multiplied to scale better. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Given the four skills briefly described above (stamina, rhythm and colour), their strain values are combined into one final Star Rating value. Previously done in two ways, this is now done in one ways - via the new *peaks* skill. *Peak* difficulty splits the map into sections and combines peaks of each skill in each section, aiming to catch out particularly demanding moments. The final Star Rating is the outputted result, slightly multiplied to scale better.
```

> While this is much more mathematically complex than mentioned, you can consult the osu!taiko general rework document listed in the above sections, or dive into the code over in the osu!lazer repositor for the full details. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
While this is much more mathematically complex than mentioned, you can consult the osu!taiko general rework document listed in the above sections, or dive into the code over in the osu!lazer repositor for the full details.
```

While previous sentiments aimed to scale maps in regards to the [difficulty naming hierarchy](/wiki/en/Ranking_Criteria/Difficulty_naming#osu!taiko), this rework has deviated away from the purpose of this, aiming to reflect true difficulty, regardless of naming. This also means that high SR values with near-fc's are no longer near 9.5*, rather can expand well into the 10* range (medal hunters rejoice!)

## Changes to Performance Points

> In recent years, osu!taiko has lagged behind the other three game modes in terms of raw performance point values (around 40% lower). In addition, the survey indicated that the way performance points are calculated needed to be re-evaluated. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In recent years, osu!taiko has lagged behind the other three game modes in terms of raw performance point values (around 40% lower). In addition, the survey indicated that the way performance points are calculated needed to be re-evaluated.
```

Performance points in osu!taiko are currently calculated by summing the "accuracy pp" and "difficulty pp" components of a score — the following changes should serve to increase their values and improve balance not only between difficulty-increasing mods, but their reductive counterparts.

Served alongside the star rating rework, these changes aim to accurately reflect the new sentiments of the star rating system.

> ### Globally applied changes

Reviewer 3: what happened to the [global pp multiplier](https://github.com/ppy/osu-wiki/pull/7883/files#diff-fb2c160439d756ca356ece6fdcbf35326417246ae61951409c5f5f81caf4b6eaR53)

(i also hope i don't have to double-check these numbers <.<)

> The final step of performance points calculation involves applying a simple multiplier to the calculated value, which consists of both difficulty and accuracy performance points. This allows for simplicity of balancing changes, and works alongside specific multipliers found within their respective separate difficulty values. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The final step of performance points calculation involves applying a simple multiplier to the calculated value, which consists of both difficulty and accuracy performance points. This allows for simplicity of balancing changes, and works alongside specific multipliers found within their respective separate difficulty values.
```

> - The HD multiplier has been decreased from **1.10x** to **1.075x**, as a further bonus was placed in difficulty PP, rather than globally. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The HD multiplier has been decreased from **1.10x** to **1.075x**, as a further bonus was placed in difficulty PP, rather than globally.
```

As well as mod multipliers being nerfed, there community survey highlighted the issues with short maps being either underweighted at a full combo, or overweighted at a misscount.

To combat this, misses will now significantly affect difficulty PP on maps with a max combo below 1000, scaling the miss count with by a multiplier of `1000 / total successful hits`, and can significantly impact short-maps with a higher misscount.

![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/effective-miss-count.jpg)

### Changes to Difficulty Performance Points Values

  The following changes should result in impressive scores on harder beatmaps rewarding a significant increase of performance point values, with top player [syaron105](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/8741695) gaining over 6400 total PP!

  Please note that these changes only affect the difficulty part of performance, which refers to the Star Rating value under a mathematically scaled formula.

- A further EZ multiplier of **0.985x** has been added, further supplementing its nerf.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

- A HR multiplier of **1.05x** has been added, this was added as a way to rebalance the changes found within accuracy PP.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> Please note that these changes only affect the difficulty part of performance, which refers to the star rating value under a mathematically scaled formula.

Reviewer 3: what is "mathematically scaled formula" supposed to mean

Reviewer: Removed this bit in cdede1d465f2efaa51b73a09709b30534fe2d6a6

- Difficulty pp now decreases by the square of decreasing accuracy instead of linearly, which applies a huge nerf unforeseen within previous low-accuracy scores.
  
  ![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/difficulty-accuracy-scaling.jpg)
  
### Changes to Accuracy Performance Points Values
  
  While Difficulty PP is straightforward, Accuracy performance contained a plethora of issues, both to do with reading-based mods (HD, FL) and mods that affect the Great Hit Window (EZ, DT, HR)

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> ![Accuracy scaling graph](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/difficulty-accuracy-scaling.jpg)

Reviewer 3: the y axis is wrong, refer to [the comment i made in the superseded pr](https://github.com/ppy/osu-wiki/pull/7883#discussion_r956643533)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36758269/187051731-78fdbabb-68c8-4eaa-bdd5-86acdc83673a.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36758269/187051879-d6c33fe0-f4a4-4e72-a49b-9d7611522c1e.png)

also this definitely needs to have the linear graph too for comparison

Reviewer: I'll have to confirm with LTCA on his changes, previously I understood the change as `return difficultyValue` -> `return difficultyValue * Math.Pow(score.Accuracy, 2.0)`, but this diff does seem more likely. I'll commit the changes once he confirms.

Reviewer: I was given the formula 2 ^ accuracy for the graph previously, will get back once he confirms

Reviewer: He has confirmed, attached is the graph with the correct formula. But the title might need a change as it was written when I had the wrong understanding of the nature of the change.
![acc-diff-scaling](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5846322/189648329-3527cfab-64e5-4a34-80b6-56fbfe688ace.png)

Reviewer: Legend seems wrong, will fix it and commit after a title has been decided

Reviewer: Title was determined to be okay, fixed and applied in df42a9724388ae7a2b61f4badd875225c52d578b

- The impact of the size of the Great (300) hit window on accuracy pp has been reduced significantly. This makes PP less dependent on the OD value of a map, which greatly reduces the issues of low SR maps, with a tight hit window.

- Star rating now affects accuracy pp, which replaces most of the scaling from the previous impact of the great hit window. This further supplements the nerfs the accuracy weighting on low-SR scores and buffs high-SR scores and thus significantly limits abuse of low-SR 3-mod/4-mod scores.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

- An Additional HDFL Bonus has been added to accuracy PP, as this requires total memorisation of maps, this is multiplied by a length bonus, rewarding more, the longer the map.
  

>   ![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/hd-fl-bonus.jpg)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/hd-fl-bonus.jpg)
```

  
## Next steps
  

>   Future changes will involve rhythm, which hasn't been touched and reading, an entirely new concept to osu!taiko, as well as many other large and small-scale changes. For people eager to dive into the technicalities, WIP details are available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit). If you would like to give feedback or help contribute, please join the [osu!dev Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) and direct your comments towards the `#difficulty-taiko` channel.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Future changes will involve rhythm, which hasn't been touched and reading, an entirely new concept to osu!taiko, as well as many other large and small-scale changes. For people eager to dive into the technicalities, WIP details are available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit). If you would like to give feedback or help contribute, please join the [osu!dev Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) and direct your comments towards the `#difficulty-taiko` channel.
```

The osu!taiko pp committee would like to give a huge thank you towards osu!taiko community for the heavy amounts of surveying, testing and feedback during the process. Another big thank you goes to [bdach](https://github.com/bdach) and [smoogipoo](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/1040328) for helping to support and review the changes to the code.

While its been a long wait (like, 2 years long) we hope that these changes will help you dominate the rankings, and better reflect the difficulties of the maps you know and love!

> —the osu!taiko pp committee

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
—the osu!taiko pp committee

```

---
layout: post
title: "Changes to osu!taiko Star Rating & Performance Points"
date: 2022-08-25 12:00:00 +0000

---

It's no secret that osu!taiko star rating is overdue for a rework. Thanks to your responses in the community survey, we are now ready to unveil a series of planned updates and improvements to how difficulty is evaluated in the osu!taiko game mode!
![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-part-1/star-rating.jpg)

> This effort was led by the newly formed [osu!taiko pp committee](/wiki/People/Performance_Points_Committee), in response to the results of the [osu!taiko SR and PP community survey](https://osu.ppy.sh/home/news/2022-02-07-taiko-mania-survey-results) held earlier this year.  We are responsible for reviewing all changes regarding star rating or performance points in the osu!taiko game mode. This newly formed team is broken into two parts, with [vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) and [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208) leading the development of the new rework, with [mangomizer](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/1893718) and [Horiiizon](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/8071438)providing the backing for the community organisation and feedback.

Author: oops, applied in 1fa2745

These changes aim to change Star Rating and Performance Points in a way that more accurately reflects the true difficulty of a map, no matter the skillset or playstyle, in contrast to previously where Star Rating's intention was to reflect true difficulty for very specific maps and to target and nerf other specific types of maps, mainly maps with cheesable patterns.

## Introduction

As done in the past, there's a few main and new terms/ideas you'll need to understand.

> Star Rating is designed to be a measure to reflect how hard (or not) a given beatmap is. It does this through mathematically charting various values in a map's construction, such as how densely packed a given portion of the map is with hitobjects, and so forth. These are described as *skills* as a general term. For the purposes of the star ratings described here, morth1 selected three skills: *stamina*, *rhythm* and *colour*.

Author: applied in 1fa2745

We will also be using terminology coined by the osu!taiko community to refer to how patterns are placed. **k** refers to kat (blue), **d** refers to don (red), coined as different 'colours'. Long streams that are of one colour are referred to as *monos*, while notes that are surrounded by brackets () refer to **1/6** spacing, and notes inside square brackets [] refer to **1/8** spacing. 

If you would like to know more about the changes posted, or for more concise information on the some of the in development changes, head on over [the global osu!taiko rework document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit#). This is a working document, and will periodically be updated with the latest, (and greatest) developments.

## An insight into the base of the new rework

> Previous rework efforts have aimed to tackle all three skills at once, which has made it difficult to collect meaningful and targetted feedback. As such, the osu!taiko pp committee opted for a modular approach, tackling new changes and reported issues one stage at a time, in order to develop more accurate solutions. In this osu!taiko star rating rework, we have re-evaluated the stamina and colour components of difficulty, with the capacity for changes following community feedback. In addition, the performance points system has been adjusted to bring it closer in line with community expectations. During this time, we have been and will continue to work on other difficulty components (both small- and large-scale) in preparation for future releases.

Reviewer 5: I assume this line was a leftover
```suggestion
Previous rework efforts have aimed to tackle all three skills at once, which has made it difficult to collect meaningful and targetted feedback. As such, the osu!taiko pp committee opted for a modular approach, tackling new changes and reported issues one stage at a time, in order to develop more accurate solutions. In this osu!taiko star rating rework, we have re-evaluated the stamina and colour components of difficulty, with the capacity for changes following community feedback. In addition, the performance points system has been adjusted to bring it closer in line with community expectations. During this time, we have been and will continue to work on other difficulty components (both small and large-scale) in preparation for future releases.
```

Author: yeah that was double up century, rewritten and applied in 1fa2745

Moving forward, osu!taiko star rating will be receiving numerous amounts of changes, potentially placing star rating and performance points in a state of flux, particularly over the coming months. This is generally desirable as we would want difficulty to accurately reflect the latest trends, but we understand and apologise if this may bring some unintended complications or frustrations, especially in the short term. 

> The previous rework effort aimed to the tackle all three skills at once. This not only made it difficulty to collect meaningful and targetted feedback, but halted continuous development efforts. To combat this, the osu!taiko pp committee developers ([vun](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/6932501) and [ltca](https://osu.ppy.sh/users/11475208)) opted for a more modular approach, tackling the new changes one stage at a time, in hopes for being able to fix reported issues one stage at a time. 

Reviewer 5: From what I learned since starting to contribute, you are only supposed to link to players the first time they are mentioned, apologies if this is not correct!

```suggestion
The previous rework effort aimed to the tackle all three skills at once. This not only made it difficulty to collect meaningful and targetted feedback, but halted continuous development efforts. To combat this, the osu!taiko pp committee developers (vun and ltca) opted for a more modular approach, tackling the new changes one stage at a time, in hopes for being able to fix reported issues one stage at a time. 
```

Author: will know for the future! also done in 1fa2745

In this osu!taiko Star Rating and Performance Points rework, we have re-evaluated and essentially rewritten the stamina and colour skills, introducing fancy new concepts and infrastructure to the complex calculations that you see as Star Rating.

> In the Performance Points sector, not only has mod multipliers been reconsidered, you will see a new way that accuracy affect your performance points. However, it is important to note that these changes are very experimental, as performance was not the priority of this rework.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the Performance Points sector, not only has mod multipliers been reconsidered, you will see a new way that accuracy affects your performance points. However, it is important to note that these changes are very experimental, as performance was not the priority of this rework.
```

Author: app in 1fa2745

Without further ado, lets get into the nitty-gritty of these changes.

# Star Rating Changes

## Readdressing Stamina

#### Issues within the old system

This system created by morth1, consisted of assuming a 2 finger kddk full alternating playstyle. (i.e. each subsequent hit is always hit by the other hand regardless of colour). This was implemented as two skills. One for the left hand, and one for the right hand. Instead of using note duration for the split skills, it uses note-pair duration. Which defines the duration between two notes that were pressed with the same hand.

As well as this, specific nerfs for specfic patterns were implemented within a 'cheese detector', which was something that the osu!taiko pp committee wanted to stay away from. As such, a policy for the all the new reworks under our wing was formed.

> **Never nerf a specific playstyle or pattern solely for a lack of particular reason.*

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**Never nerf a specific playstyle or pattern solely for a lack of particular reason.**
```

Author: applied in 42a1e3f

#### The new system of Stamina

In this section, the keybinds relating to the two colours found within osu!taiko are named k<sup>1</sup>, k<sup>2</sup> and d<sup>1</sup>, d<sup>2</sup>. 

> - Instead of assuming a full-alternate play style, we assume that ****each note of the same colour is always alternated.** For example, for the pattern kdkdkd, we assume the kat's will be hit by **k<sup>1</sup>** d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup> **k<sup>2</sup>** d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup> **k<sup>1</sup>**, and the don's will be hit by k<sup>1</sup> **d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup>** k<sup>2</sup> **d<sup>1</sup> d<sup>2</sup>** k<sup>2</sup>.

Author: fixed in 1fa2745

## Readdressing Colour

The old colour system detected the frequency of colour changes and had penalties for specific repeated patterns, this meant that only notes with a different colour from the previous could get more than a non-zero strain, which contributed to issues of complex patterns containing large groups of single coloured notes not being considered properly in the strain system.

Similar to stamina, a repetition penalty was applied on durations of single-coloured patterns. While only the 5 most recent durations were considered in this penalty, if any two or more of those patterns were repeated, a harsh penalty was applied.

Once again, going against the new policies of this rework, changes were made.

#### The new Colour system

For the new system we define colour difficulty as the amount of information contained within a given pattern (or sequence if you will). For example, we can take a look with the following colour patterns and the very rough amount of information required to describe them:

![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/colour-graphic-1.jpg)

> As we can see, a more complex pattern (by definition) requires more information to describe. To compute this, we run a compression algorithm to try to encode a given colour sequence with the minimum amount of information required. One thing to note is traditional compression algorithms typically build a dictionary from repetitive patterns, the new algorithm however, has to take where the repetitions take place into account, as repetitions that occur far from each other are typically harder to play than repetitions that’s close to each other. 

Reviewer 5: smart quotes bad 
```suggestion
As we can see, a more complex pattern (by definition) requires more information to describe. To compute this, we run a compression algorithm to try to encode a given colour sequence with the minimum amount of information required. One thing to note is traditional compression algorithms typically build a dictionary from repetitive patterns, the new algorithm however, has to take where the repetitions take place into account, as repetitions that occur far from each other are typically harder to play than repetitions that's close to each other. 
```

Author: marktext is failing me, sorted in 1fa2745

While previous sentiments aimed to scale maps in regards to the [difficulty naming hierarchy](https://osu.ppy.sh/wiki/en/Ranking_Criteria/Difficulty_naming#osu!taiko), this rework has deviated away from the purpose of this, aiming to reflect true difficulty, regardless of naming. This also means that high SR values with near-fc's are no longer near 9.5*, rather can expand well into the 10* range (medal hunters rejoice!)

# Changes to Performance Points

In recent years, osu!taiko has lagged behind the other three game modes in terms of raw performance point values (around 40% lower). In addition, the survey indicated that the way performance points are calculated needed to be re-evaluated. 

Performance points in osu!taiko are currently calculated by summing the "accuracy pp" and "difficulty pp" components of a score — the following changes should serve to increase their values and improve balance not only between difficulty increasing mods, but their reductive counterparts.

> Lead by LTCA, these changes aim to accurately reflect the new sentiments of the SR system.

Reviewer 5: Few things I noticed:
- The capitalization of the name is not consistent
- The users name does not match what's within the article
I am not sure if the 2nd one is allowed/acceptable? Someone more knowledgeable will need to look at this.

Author: yeah that was left over as copy + paste from previous draft article with a replaced name, it's not something i want to self credit with so i'll defs be removing it

Author: removed in 1fa2745

#### Globally-applied changes

The final step of performance points calculation involves applying a simple multiplier to the calculated value, which consists of both difficulty and accuracy performance points. This allows for simplicity of balancing changes, and works alongside specific multipliers found within their respective separate difficulty values. 

- The HD multiplier has been decreased from **1.10x** to **1.075x**, as a further bonus was placed in difficulty PP, rather than globally. 

- An EZ multiplier of **0.975x** has been added, to further nerf a problematic mod, especially when paired with double-time.
  

>   The NF multiplier has been removed, as osu!taiko's HP system is different, it is not required nor needed, which also helps prevent sandbaggers in lower ranks.

Reviewer 5: I assume you want bullet points for this one and all of them below?

Author: yep, sorted in 1fa2745

  
  #### Changes to Accuracy Performance Points Values
  
  While Difficulty PP is straightforward, Accuracy performance contained a plethora of issues, both to do with reading-based mods (HD, FL) and mods that affect the Great Hit Window (EZ, DT, HR)

- The impact of the size of the Great (300) hit window on accuracy pp has been reduced significantly. This makes PP less dependent on the OD value of a map, which greatly reduces the issues of low SR maps, with a tight hit window.

- Star rating now affects accuracy pp, which replaces most of the scaling from the previous impact of the great hit window. This further supplements the nerfs the accuracy weighting on low-SR scores and buffs high-SR scores and thus significantly limits abuse of low-SR 3-mod/4-mod scores.

- An Additional HDFL Bonus has been added to accuracy PP, as this requires total memorisation of maps, this is multiplied by a length bonus, rewarding more, the longer the map.
  
  ![](/wiki/shared/news/2022-08-25-changes-to-osu-taiko-star-rating-and-performance-points/hd-fl-bonus.jpg)
  
  ## Next steps
  

>   Future changes will involve rhythm, which is hasn't been touched and reading, an entirely new concept to osu!taiko, as well as many other large and small-scale changes. For people eager to dive into the technicalities, WIP details are available [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z5GC4DMqOVzeIERMSK3qpQaqjq-sVnhbuoxAwy9qxDs/edit). If you would like to give feedback or help contribute, please join the [osu!dev Discord server](https://discord.gg/ppy) and direct your comments towards the `#difficulty-taiko` channel.

Author: since i couldnt batch apply these changes, i had to do them manually, so i apologise for the notification spam

(also applied in 1fa2745)

The reason for this is to assume the best-case scenario for repeated keystrokes regardless of playstyle. In other words, we aim to approximate the theoretical minimum stamina required to play a given pattern with any playstyle, with any theoretically rollable pattern being rolled. We can't (feasibly), nor is it desirable to, detect playstyles, so we assume the case that requires the least physical repetition, which is to switch keys each time a colour is to be hit, and as such all other existing playstyles will be weaker in comparison to the one we chose.

### Readdressing colour

#### Issues within the old system

> The old colour system detected the frequency of colour changes and had penalties for specific repeated patterns. This meant that only notes of a different colour than the previous one would receive a non-zero strain, which contributed to issues of complex patterns containing large groups of single-coloured notes not being considered properly in the strain system. Similar to stamina, a penalty was applied to repeated occurrences of single-coloured patterns. While only the 5 most recent occurrences were considered in this penalty, if any two or more of those patterns were repeated, a harsh penalty was applied.

Reviewer 6: It's not immediately clear to me what the issues with the old system are (regarding colour).

Reviewer 7: ```Previously, the old system detected only the frequency of changes between colours and had specific penalties for particular repeated patterns. This led to complex patterns containing large quantities of single-coloured notes not being considered properly in regards to overall strain values. 

In addition, a penalty was applied to repeat instances of these patterns. This only considered up to five recent occurrences, but if any two or more of such repeats occurred, a harsh penalty was applied.```

is a reword like this more helpful in this regard?
